I reviewed 12 HelpSteer2 contradictions with AI assistance

The primary rule uses correctness and coherence only. Overall helpfulness is
held out. I selected defended pairs with a nonzero Pareto sign opposite the
nonzero human preference sign. There were 151 such pairs: 143 train and 8
validation. Eight validation cases cannot supply a twelve-case sample, so I
sampled from all 151 IDs sorted lexicographically, using seed 20261007.
I saved human-selection.json before reading the sampled text. The fixed draw
contains 11 train cases and 1 validation case; it is not validation-only.

I read every full conversation prompt, both full responses, the post-processed
preference statement/elaboration, the most-similar preferences and all supplied
unprocessed human justifications. human-samples.jsonl preserves all of them,
plus the original five numeric aspect scores from the compact source.

I lean toward the human preference direction in 8 cases, the Pareto direction
in 2, and remain uncertain in 2. The primary category counts are:
  Prompt constraint versus fluency: 4
  Grounding or correctness tension: 3
  Completeness versus scope: 2
  Underspecified prompt: 1
  Audience or conversation alignment: 2

These are AI-assisted qualitative judgments, not independent human annotations,
not a human-error audit, and not preference accuracy. I could see the ratings
and human feedback. I assigned categories after reading. A preferred response
can remain incomplete or wrong. The raw human preferences often contain real
dissent; their aggregation and rounded aspect scores need not represent the
same priorities. I did not execute response code or independently fact-check
all philosophical, astronomical, financial or product claims.

Per-case notes in fixed draw order

1. helpsteer2:04586 — Philosophy and finance — Human preference, moderate.
Pareto: response 2; human: response 1, strength -2.
Response 1 applies broader philosophical ideas to course activities. Response 2
asserts direct financial positions, including a sweeping claim that Kant thought
borrowing morally wrong, without support. I prefer the interpretive framing,
while noting that response 1's final topics are not tied to named philosophers.
I have not independently checked those historical attributions.

2. helpsteer2:06456 — Chronological summary — Human preference, strong.
Pareto: response 2; human: response 1, strength -2.
Response 1 orders Florida training, summer wins, the US Open start and victory.
Response 2 is smoother but puts summer success in a clause after the US Open
win. The prompt explicitly requires chronological ordering, so I prefer task
fit over the sole decisive coherence advantage.

3. helpsteer2:01458 — Research paper — Uncertain.
Pareto: response 2; human: response 1, strength -2.
Response 1 supplies a title, abstract, introduction and references but leaves
most sections as descriptions and speaks as if a proposed study has results.
Response 2 gives transparent but generic writing guidance, not the requested
paper. The feedback divides over partial completion versus misleading simulated
research. Neither is publication-ready, and I have not verified the references.

4. helpsteer2:05630 — Radio astronomy — Uncertain.
Pareto: response 2; human: response 1, strength -1.
The full prompt is only 'please explain how radio astron'. Response 1 gives
mechanism, interference, discoveries and applications; response 2 explains more
observable objects. The intended scope is not established. A historical date
is disputed in the human feedback, but I have not checked it independently.

5. helpsteer2:08683 — Science day skit — Human preference, moderate.
Pareto: response 1; human: response 2, strength +2. This is the validation case.
Response 1 is a short crisis premise without a concrete resolution. Response 2
has characters and a beginning-to-end experiment/accident/containment plot.
I prefer the usable plot despite its longer four-act outline and mismatched
'end credits roll' line. Four acts alone do not establish runtime, and the
human feedback genuinely disagrees about what a short skit requires.

6. helpsteer2:01908 — Unity tutoring — Pareto, strong.
Pareto: response 2; human: response 1, strength -2.
The full conversation says to give only one step at a time. Response 2 gives
one Content-reference assignment. Response 1 gives several steps, introduces
Content Size properties and prematurely declares the advanced UI complete.
I prefer response 2's pacing and more plausible action, without claiming the
inherited tutorial is correct. It should specify a RectTransform reference.
Some human preferences explicitly value coverage despite the pacing violation.
No Unity code was executed.

7. helpsteer2:05448 — QR-menu owner pitch — Pareto, weak.
Pareto: response 2; human: response 1, strength -2.
Response 2 emphasizes owner-facing editing and dashboard screenshots. Response 1
explains benefits but mostly suggests diner ordering and loyalty screens.
I slightly prefer the owner focus. Both invent possible product capabilities
not established by the prompt, so neither is a verified description of the app.
Human preferences instead value broader benefits or more elaborate prose.

8. helpsteer2:02300 — Resume without a resume — Human preference, strong.
Pareto: response 1; human: response 2, strength +1.
No resume exists in the full conversation. Response 1 nevertheless claims
specific suggestions and says the resume looks good. Response 2 gives general
tips without pretending it reviewed a document. Both should request the resume,
but I prefer response 2's lack of fabricated review context.

9. helpsteer2:08302 — E-commerce movie — Human preference, moderate.
Pareto: response 1; human: response 2, strength +1.
Response 1 tells a richer eventual-success story. Response 2 more explicitly
narrates the website, social media, advertising, SEO, service and prices from
the preceding conversation. I prefer those requested steps. Neither specifies
an exact individual product or handles Australian requirements in useful detail.

10. helpsteer2:08664 — Beginner crypto course — Human preference, moderate.
Pareto: response 2; human: response 1, strength -1.
Both have ten chapters. Response 1 supplies actual practical-lesson ideas and
strategy/risk planning. Response 2 mostly relegates practical lessons to a
closing suggestion and adds an advanced-techniques chapter for beginners.
I prefer response 1's task fit but do not endorse its Martingale mention or
response 2's leverage and derivatives material as a safe financial curriculum.

11. helpsteer2:01915 — Continue Android blog from V — Human preference, weak.
Pareto: response 2; human: response 1, strength -1.
Both restart from I and give outlines rather than the requested code. Response 1
at least retains the process name and code/path requirement; response 2 becomes
more generic and repetitive. I slightly prefer the retained details, not the
promises of persistence after uninstalling the parent app. Neither supplies a
working mechanism, and Android feasibility was not checked.

12. helpsteer2:08095 — Regression gradient — Human preference, strong.
Pareto: response 2; human: response 1, strength -1.
Response 1 gives (2/b) B^T (Bw-t). Response 2 gives -2/b (t-Bw) B^T. With B
shaped b by d and the residual b by 1, response 2's product is not generally
defined. This is static dimensional reasoning, not an executed numeric check.
Most human preferences favor response 1 for concision and call both formulas
correct; my reason is separate from those claims. The correctness scores rank
response 2 higher, so the two-aspect rule selects the less defensible formula.

What this adds

This sample makes some mismatches concrete: coherence cannot substitute for
chronological ordering, apparently specific feedback can invent missing context,
and completeness can conflict with a one-step request. It also shows that
neither a human preference direction nor two rounded aspect scores remove the
need to read the actual task and response. I do not turn these twelve judgments
into a superiority claim for either method.

Source and reproduction

After generating results/human-preferences, run:
nice -n 19 python tools/review_disagreements.py --human-cache PATH_TO_HELPSTEER2_CACHE

The cache must contain preference/preference.jsonl.gz from pinned HelpSteer2
revision 990b2711a36180dd19d9c94b8627844866f8982a. The helper checks the cached
compressed hash and existing compact hash, selects IDs before text, and retains
only the twelve full preference rows. It matched all 12 prompt hashes, all 24
response hashes, original preference strengths and normalized splits (upstream
'val' means validation). It made no model calls and used no paid compute.
The code fetches the sample; it does not regenerate these qualitative judgments.

HelpSteer2 and HelpSteer2-Preference, NVIDIA and Scale AI; Zhilin Wang et al.
License: CC-BY-4.0. Changes: sampled subset; full preference fields retained;
aspect scores joined from the compact source by checked prompt/response hashes.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
https://huggingface.co/datasets/nvidia/HelpSteer2/resolve/990b2711a36180dd19d9c94b8627844866f8982a/preference/preference.jsonl.gz
https://huggingface.co/datasets/nvidia/HelpSteer2/resolve/990b2711a36180dd19d9c94b8627844866f8982a/README.md
https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.08673
https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.01257

The source card says statement/elaboration text is post-processed from human
justifications and that the most-similar preferences determine the overall
label. All supplied raw preferences remain available in the sample, including
dissent. human-review.json contains structured decisions and exact supporting
quotes; human-provenance.json records attribution and full-text hash matches.
