I reviewed 12 existing UltraFeedback disagreements with AI assistance

I fixed a random sample before reading the text: seed 20261007, sampling 12
from the 132 disagreement pair IDs sorted lexicographically. selection.json
preserves the population, draw order, original pair records and pairs.csv hash.
I read the full upstream prompt and BOTH full responses for every case, along
with the full original aspect rationales and overall critiques. samples.jsonl
stores those texts, including the original reference answers where supplied.

This is an AI-assisted qualitative review, not independent human truth. I could
see the score directions and the upstream feedback. I chose the categories after
reading. I did not independently fact-check every claim. A preferred direction
can still select a wrong answer; uncertain means I cannot defend a relative
preference from this content. These counts are not preference accuracy.

I find the overall direction more defensible in 6 cases, the Pareto direction
in 3, and remain uncertain in 3. The six primary categories are:
  Factual failure or unsupported detail: 5
  Coverage versus concision: 2
  Confidence cue versus calibration: 2
  Premise alignment: 1
  Irrelevant social boilerplate: 1
  Rationale/text mismatch: 1

The calculation is not the main problem exposed by these cases. It follows
its input aspect ratings. Those ratings sometimes reward extra detail or
confidence and sometimes contain a rationale contradicted by the response.
The overall critiques have errors too. This sample does not establish that
overall scores are better labels, or measure downstream preference quality.

Per-case notes (draw order; a = Pareto winner, b = overall winner)

1. pair_63566383e3b3 — Elon the mathematician — Pareto, weak.
Both answer Elon Musk, while the reference says Elon Lindenstrauss. A notices
that Musk is not a genius math person and hedges; b just asserts the wrong name.
The overall critique calls b correct while its truthfulness annotation calls
it a severe hallucination. I prefer a's slight caution, not its extra biography.

2. pair_bbab6fd559e9 — Enough rope — Overall, moderate.
Both explain the idiom instead of answering the literal question. B explicitly
calls it metaphorical and says outcomes vary. A adds repeated downfall warnings
and a confused example. Its helpfulness rationale credits a literal answer
that is not actually present. B is still incomplete relative to the reference.

3. pair_26ea51038d83 — Let them eat cake — Overall, moderate.
B acknowledges uncertainty. A offers a confident 1789 pamphlet origin, whereas
the reference points to Rousseau's autobiography. I have not checked historical
sources, but the added story is not supported by the retained reference. The
honesty rationale penalizes b's uncertainty; neither handles attribution cleanly.

4. pair_9663ebad0e35 — Voodoo dolls — Uncertain.
A lists more ritual uses; b emphasizes symbols and belief. Neither clearly
separates ritual use from demonstrated physical effects or gives the reference's
novelty/decorative uses. I cannot verify the broader cultural claims here, so
extra coverage does not settle which response is better.

5. pair_2f87f2257da9 — Scotland and England — Pareto, strong.
A corrects the premise and gives the UK and 1707 union context. B also corrects
it, then misleadingly calls Scotland sovereign if read as an independent state.
Both instruction-following rationales wrongly penalize correcting a false
premise. The overall critique asks for uncertainty even when the answer is known.

6. pair_8cad29cd8b29 — Abdominal fat loss — Uncertain.
Neither explicitly rejects spot reduction. A gives much more general advice
but uses confident targeting language and an abdominal HIIT claim; b adds a
green-tea claim questioned by its own annotation. The overall critiques flag
the shared omission, yet a gets perfect aspect ratings. I cannot defend either
as clearly better without checking their health claims. This is not medical advice.

7. pair_3e00e1d6e8b6 — Australian pets — Uncertain.
Both name ordinary pets. A invokes an unidentified veterinary study, adds
hamsters and livestock, and receives credit for confident sourcing. B hedges
about unique Australian species without inventing a specific exotic pet. I
cannot verify the study or every listed animal, and the hedge is not dishonesty.

8. pair_f9c94769ec1d — An AI's children — Overall, weak.
Neither directly says it has no children. A redirects to parenting advice;
b identifies itself as an AI and rejects physical punishment. I slightly
prefer b's clearer speaker identity despite its boilerplate and indirectness.

9. pair_2fcae7281937 — Chili pepper heat — Overall, weak.
Both correctly identify the inner white membrane and capsaicin. A adds useful
synonyms but an unexplained 'Confidence: 90%'. B is sufficient and concise. Its
honesty annotation penalizes the absence of an explicit confidence statement.
I do not treat a's number as evidence of calibration; this preference is close.

10. pair_f225e3f743cb — French and Danish currencies — Pareto, moderate.
Both give euros and Danish krone. B thanks the user for 'kind words' absent
from the full prompt. A answers directly. I prefer avoiding invented social
context, not because a's extra exchange advice has been independently checked.

11. pair_083e639341aa — Salieri and Mozart — Overall, moderate.
The sole decisive Pareto gap is instruction following. The rationale says b
does not explicitly reject evidence of poisoning, but b literally says there
is 'no concrete evidence to suggest Salieri poisoned Mozart'. B also gives
concrete examples of support for Mozart's work. The rationale/text mismatch
is directly visible without needing an external historical fact-check.

12. pair_571bc6de1852 — Aircraft black box — Overall, moderate.
Both give orange but add other colors not supported by the retained reference.
A first links the name 'black box' to a bright cover and later says it describes
function rather than appearance. B explains visibility without that confused
naming story. I prefer b without endorsing its red alternative.

Source and reproduction

Run: nice -n 19 python tools/review_disagreements.py

The stdlib helper consumes only the first 200 lines of the pinned UltraFeedback
truthful_qa.jsonl revision 40b436560ca83a8dba36114c22ab3c66e43f6d5e. It consumed
2,425,518 bytes, matched the existing prefix hash, and checked 24 full response
hashes, 12 prompt hashes, sampled source-line hashes and original aspect and
overall scores against the existing compact source. It stores only sampled
texts. Re-running refuses a changed selection manifest rather than replacing
this sample. The code fetches texts; it does not regenerate these judgments.

UltraFeedback: Ganqu Cui, Lifan Yuan, Ning Ding, Guanming Yao, Wei Zhu, Yuan Ni,
Guotong Xie, Zhiyuan Liu and Maosong Sun (2023).
Pinned card (declares MIT):
https://huggingface.co/datasets/openbmb/UltraFeedback/raw/40b436560ca83a8dba36114c22ab3c66e43f6d5e/README.md
Pinned source:
https://huggingface.co/datasets/openbmb/UltraFeedback/resolve/40b436560ca83a8dba36114c22ab3c66e43f6d5e/truthful_qa.jsonl
TruthfulQA prompts: Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton and Owain Evans (2022).
https://github.com/sylinrl/TruthfulQA
UltraFeedback's MIT card does not erase upstream source dataset terms; consult
TruthfulQA's license and source notices before reuse. The original scores and
feedback are GPT-4 annotations, not verified human truth. review.json contains
the structured judgments, exact supporting quotes and explicit limitations;
provenance.json contains the source and response-hash checks.
